# How to create simple  java project in eclipse - GeeksforGeeks

Creating a Java project in Eclipse IDE is the first step toward developing Java applications. Eclipse is a powerful IDE that simplifies project creation, code management, and application execution through its built-in development tools. In this guide, we'll create a Java project and run a simple program step by step.Creates a well-organized project structure for Java applications.Provides built-in tools for code editing, debugging, and error detection.Automatically compiles Java source files whenever you save your code.Java ProjectA Java project is a collection of Java source files, packages, libraries, and configuration files organized into a single workspace. A typical Java project contains:src : Java source filesJRE System Library : Java runtime librariesbin : Compiled .class files (created automatically)Step-by-Step Implementation To Create a Simple Java Project in Eclipse IDE Follow these below steps to create a simple java project to run your first program on eclipse.Step 1: Open Eclipse IDELaunch Eclipse IDE from your desktop shortcut or installation directory. When Eclipse starts for the first time, it prompts you to select a Workspace, which is the location where all your Java projects and related files will be stored.Open Eclipse IDE. Choose a workspace directory to store your projects. Click Launch to start Eclipse with the selected workspace.Step 2: Create a New Java ProjectTo create a new Java project in Eclipse, navigate to the File menu and select New -> Java Project. If the Java Project option is not visible, you can access it through the Project wizard.Click File -> New -> Java Project. If not available, click File -> New -> Project -> Java -> Java Project. Enter a project name and click Finish to create the project. Step 3: Enter Project DetailsAfter selecting Java Project, the New Java Project wizard opens. Fill in the following details:Project Name: HelloWorldProjectJRE: Select the installed JDK.Other Settings: Leave the remaining options as default.Finally, click Finish to create the Java project. Below is the final project structure in the below image.  Step 4: Create a Package Right-click on src and select New - Package.  Enter package name and Click Finish Step 5: Create a Java ClassRight-click on the package and Select New - Class Enter the class name and click Finish. Eclipse automatically generates the class. Step 6: Write Java CodeNow here we Write our First Program code To print Hello World
            Java

    public class HelloWorld {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
         System.out.println("Hello, World!");
    }
}

OutputHello, World!
Step 7: Save the FilePress the following commands to save your file.Ctrl + SStep 8: Run the Java ProgramRight-click the Java file.Select  Run As - Java Application OR Click the Run (▶) button from the toolbar. After running the  program  the console window displays:Output: Explanation: Creating a Java project in Eclipse is a straightforward process that involves setting up a workspace, creating a project, adding packages and classes, writing Java code, and running the application. Eclipse automates compilation and provides powerful development features to built java Application.
