# Loops in Python - GeeksforGeeks

Loops are used to execute a block of code repeatedly until a condition is met or all items in a sequence are processed. The main types are For loops (iterating over sequences) and While loops (executing code based on a condition). For LoopFor loops is used to iterate over a sequence such as a list, tuple, string or range. It executes a block of code once for each item in the sequence.
            Python

    n = 4
for i in range(0, n):
    print(i)

Output0
1
2
3
Explanation: n = 4 stores the ending value for the loop.range(0, n) generates numbers from 0 to 3.for i in range(0, n): iterates through each number in the range.Below is the flowchart of For loop:Flowchart of For LoopIterating by Index of SequencesA for loop can also iterate through sequence elements using their index values with the help of range() and len().
            Python

    a = ["geeks", "for", "geeks"]
for idx in range(len(a)):
    print(a[idx])

Outputgeeks
for
geeks
Explanation: len(a) returns the total number of elements in the list. range(len(a)) generates index values from 0 to 2. a[idx] accesses list elements using their index.While LoopWhile loop repeatedly executes a block of code as long as the given condition remains true. When the condition becomes false, the line immediately after the loop in the program is executed.
            Python

    cnt = 0
while (cnt < 3):
    cnt = cnt + 1
    print("Hello Geek")

OutputHello Geek
Hello Geek
Hello Geek
Explanation:cnt = 0 initializes the counter variable.while (cnt < 3): runs the loop while the condition is true.cnt = cnt + 1 increases the counter value by 1.Below is the flowchart of While loop:Flowchart of While loopInfinite While LoopAn infinite while loop runs continuously because its condition always remains true.
            Python

    while (True):
    print("Hello Geek")

Explanation:while(True): creates a loop with a condition that is always true.print("Hello Geek") keeps executing repeatedly inside the loop.Note: It is suggested not to use this type of loop as it is a never-ending infinite loop where the condition is always true and we have to forcefully terminate the program (or loop execution).Nested LoopsA nested loop is a loop inside another loop. The inner loop executes completely for every iteration of the outer loop.
            Python

    for i in range(1, 5):
    for j in range(i):
        print(i, end=' ')
    print()

Output1 
2 2 
3 3 3 
4 4 4 4 
Explanation: Outer loop for i in range(1, 5) controls the number of rows and Inner loop for j in range(i) runs i times for each row.print(i, end=' ') prints the value of i on the same line and print() moves output to the next line after each row.Related Articles:For loop vs while loopEliminating Loop Control statements
