# free Command in Linux - GeeksforGeeks

The free command in Linux is used to display information about system memory usage. It reports the total amount of physical RAM and swap memory, along with how much is used, free, shared, buffered, and cached. This command is commonly used for system monitoring, performance troubleshooting, and resource planning.Displays total, used, and free memoryShows RAM and swap memory statisticsIncludes buffer and cache memory usageLightweight and safe monitoring utilityExample 1: Display Memory Usage (Default)Syntax:freeCommand:freeOutput:total: Total installed memoryused: Memory in use, excluding buffers and cache in some explanations; in practice, free output should be read together with buff/cache because Linux can reclaim cache anytimefree: Completely unallocated memoryshared: Memory used by tmpfsbuffers: Memory used by kernel bufferscached: Memory used for file caching (reclaimable)available: Estimated memory available for new applicationsNotes: Default unit is KiB (1024 bytes)Syntaxfree [OPTION]Options of free Command1. -h, --humanDisplays memory in a human-readable format.Command:free -hOutput:Output2. -b (Displaying Output in Bytes) It just displays the output in unit bytes.Command:free -bOutput:Output3. -k (Displaying Output in Kilobytes)This option displays the result in kilobytes.Command:free -kOutput:Output4. -m (Displaying Output in Megabytes)This option displays the result in megabytes.Command:free -mOutput:Output5. -g (Displaying Output in Gigabytes)This option displays the result in gigabytes.Command:free -gOutput:6. -t (Displaying Totals)This option displays an additional line containing the sum of the total, used and free columns.Command:free -tOutput:Output7. -s and -c (Continuously Monitoring Memory Usage)The -s option allows the free command to display memory usage repeatedly at a specified time interval. You must provide a numeric value representing the delay (in seconds) between each update. The -c option is used together with -s to specify how many times the output should be displayed.Command:free -s 3 -c 3-s 3: Refresh the output every 3 seconds-c 3: Display the output 3 timesOutput:This command will show memory usage every 3 seconds and stop automatically after 3 updates.Note: If you use -s without -c, the output will continue refreshing indefinitely until you manually stop it (for example, by pressing Ctrl + C).Importance of Linux free CommandReal-time Memory Monitoring: Provides the immediate insight regarding the system memory usage. It helps the administrators and users in monitoring the resource allocation.Performance Optimization: Allows the users for proactive management by identifying memory-intensive processes or applications, enabling timely adjustments to improve overall system performance.Resource Planning: Efficient resource planning and allocation decisions based on accurate data about available, used, and cached memory, ensuring optimal utilization of system resources.
