# Design and Implementation Issue of Distributed Shared Memory - GeeksforGeeks

DSM is a mechanism that manages memory across multiple nodes and makes inter-process communications transparent to end-users. To design information shared memory we might deal with certain issues which are called issues.

Issues to Design and Implementation of DSM:

GranularityStructure of shared memory spaceMemory coherence and access synchronizationData location and accessReplacement strategyThrashingHeterogeneity1. Granularity: Granularity refers to the block size of a DSM system. Granularity refers to the unit of sharing and the unit of data moving across the network when a network block shortcoming then we can utilize the estimation of the block size as words/phrases. The block size might be different for the various networks.

2.Structure of shared memory space: Structure refers to the design of the shared data in the memory. The structure of the shared memory space of a DSM    system is regularly dependent on the sort of applications that the DSM  system is intended to support.

3. Memory coherence and access synchronization: In the DSM system the shared data things ought to be accessible by different nodes simultaneously in the network. The fundamental issue in this system is data irregularity. The data irregularity might be raised by the synchronous access. To solve this problem in the DSM system we need to utilize some synchronization primitives, semaphores, event count, and so on.

4. Data location and access: To share the data in the DSM system it ought to be possible to locate and retrieve the data as accessed by clients or processors. Therefore the DSM system must implement some form of data block finding system to serve network data to meet the requirement of the memory coherence semantics being utilized. 

5. Replacement strategy: In the local memory of the node is full, a cache miss at the node implies not just a get of the gotten to information block from a remote node but also a replacement. A data block of the local memory should be replaced by the new data block. Accordingly, a position substitution methodology is additionally vital in the design of a DSM system.

6. Thrashing: In a DSM system data blocks move between nodes on demand. In this way on the off chance that 2 nodes compete for write access to the single data item. The data relating data block might be moved to back and forth at such a high rate that no genuine work can get gone. The DSM system should utilize an approach to keep away from a situation generally known as thrashing.

7. Heterogeneity: The DSM system worked for homogeneous systems and need not address the heterogeneity issue. In any case, assuming the underlined system environment is heterogeneous, the DSM system should be designed to deal with heterogeneous, so it works appropriately with machines having different architectures.
