# Complete Roadmap to Learn System Design for Beginners - GeeksforGeeks

This article is an important resource if you're new to system design and aiming for interviews at top tech companies. It breaks down system design concepts into easy-to-understand steps, starting from the basics and gradually advancing to more complex topics. By the end, you'll be equipped with the knowledge and confidence to tackle any system design questions in interviews and excel in your new role.  Important Topics for Roadmap to Learn System Design  Getting Started with System Design  Basics of System Design  What is High-Level Design?  Databases in Designing Systems  Unified Modeling Language (UML) Diagrams  What is Low-Level Design?  Scalability in System Design  Testing and Quality Assurance in System Design  System Design Interview Questions and Answers  How to Crack System Design Interview Round 
 #iframe {width: 100%; aspect-ratio:100/145; background-color: white;}
 Chapter 1: Getting Started with System Design  System design is the process of designing the architecture and components of a software system to meet specific business requirements. The process involves defining the system’s architecture, components, modules, and interfaces, and identifying the technologies and tools that will be used to implement the system.  What is System Design?  Why System Design is important?  Difference between System Design and System Analysis  Difference between System Design and System Architecture  Difference between System Design and System Development  What is System Design Life Cycle(SDLC)?  System Design Strategies  Chapter 2: Basics of System Design  System design is like creating a strong base for software. It involves understanding what the software needs to do and how it should perform. We decide how to handle more users or data and organize the software parts efficiently. We use smart ways of designing, like thinking about objects and their relationships. Understanding these basics helps us create reliable and efficient software.  Functional vs Non Functional Requirements  Horizontal and Vertical Scaling  Components of System Design  System Design Architectures  Monolithic and Distributed Systems  What are microservices?  Monolithic vs Microservices  Event-Driven Architecture  Object-Oriented Analysis and Design | OOAD  Difference between Structured and Object-Oriented Analysis  Latency and Throughput in System Design  Redundancy in System Design  What is Domain Name System(DNS)?  Chapter 3: What is High-Level Design?  High-level design in system design is crucial as it provides a roadmap for creating complex software systems. It outlines the overall structure, components, and interactions within the system. Without a clear high-level design, developers may struggle to understand how different parts of the system relate to each other, leading to confusion and inefficiency during implementation  .  Ultimately, high-level design ensures that the resulting software system is well-organized, robust, and able to meet its intended objectives effectively  What is High Level Design  Availability in System Design  Eventual Consistency  Reliability in System Design  CAP Theorem  Content Delivery Network  Load Balancer – System Design  Consistent Hashing  Caching | System Design  API Gateway  Message Queues  Distributed Messaging System  Communication Protocols In System Design  Web Servers and Proxies in System Design  Chapter 4: Databases in Designing Systems  Understanding databases is essential in system design because they are the foundation for managing and storing data efficiently. Having in-depth knowledge of database concepts allows designers to make informed decisions about how data will be stored, queried, and managed within the system. It ensures that the system can handle large volumes of data effectively, while also ensuring data integrity and security.  Which Database to Choose while designing a system – SQL or NoSQL  File and Database Storage Systems in System Design  Block, Object, and File Storage  Database Sharding  Data Partitioning  Indexing in System Design  Chapter 5: Scalability in System Design  Understanding scalability in system design is crucial as it ensures that the system can handle increasing loads and growing demands efficiently. It ensures that the system remains responsive and reliable as demand increases, providing a positive user experience and supporting the system's long-term success. Therefore, understanding scalability is essential for designing systems that can grow and adapt to meet changing needs effectively  What is Scalability and How to achieve it – Learn System Design  Which Scalability approach is right for our Application? | System Design  Primary Bottlenecks that Hurt the Scalability of an Application | System Design  Chapter 6: __mask-a__index=53__ Understanding UML (Unified Modeling Language) diagrams is crucial in system design as they provide a standardized way to visually represent various aspects of a software system. UML diagrams act as blueprints, helping designers communicate and document system requirements, architecture, and behavior effectively. Grasping UML concepts enables designers to create clear and concise diagrams that aid in the analysis, design, and implementation phases of the software development lifecycle.  Therefore, understanding UML diagrams is essential for creating well-designed and maintainable software systems.  Class Diagram  Object Diagram  Package Diagram  State Machine Diagram  Activity Diagram  Swimlane Diagram  Usecase Diagram  Sequence Diagram  Chapter 7: What is Low-Level Design?  Low-level design in system design is equally important as it delves into the detailed implementation of the system components outlined in the high-level design. While high-level design provides a broad overview, low-level design focuses on the specifics of how each component will be built and how they will interact at a granular level. It involves defining data structures, algorithms, interfaces, and modules required to realize the system's functionality. It serves as a blueprint for translating high-level design concepts into executable code, ultimately contributing to the development of a robust and reliable software system.  What is Low Level Design or LLD  Software Design Patterns  Data Structures and Algorithms for System Design  Difference between Authentication and Authorization  What is Data Encryption?  Code Optimization Techniques  Unit Testing  Integration Testing  CI/CD: Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery  Modularity and Interfaces In System Design  Chapter 8: Testing and Quality Assurance in System Design  Understanding testing and quality assurance in system design is essential for making sure the software works well. Testing involves checking that each part of the system does what it's supposed to do, while quality assurance ensures the overall software meets the required standards. By doing this, designers can find and fix problems early, leading to better-quality software that works reliably for users  Types of Software Testing  Software Quality Assurance  Security Testing  Essential Security Measures in System Design  Chapter 9: System Design Interview Questions and Answers  This System Design Interview Guide will provide the most commonly asked system design interview questions and equip you with the knowledge and techniques needed to design, build, and scale your robust applications, for professionals and newbies  Most Commonly Asked System Design Interview Problems/Questions  Top Low-Level Design(LLD) Interview Questions 2024  Chapter 10: How to Crack System Design Interview Round  The system design interview is a crucial step in many technical job interviews, where candidates are tasked with designing scalable, efficient, and reliable systems to solve real-world problems. To excel in this round, candidates must demonstrate a deep understanding of architectural principles, problem-solving skills, and the ability to communicate effectively. This guide offers concise strategies and tips to help you prepare for and ace the system design interview.  Crack System Design Interview Round  5 Common System Design Concepts for Interview Preparation
