# Redis Introduction - GeeksforGeeks

Redis (Remote Dictionary Server) is an in-memory database that stores data in RAM instead of disk, making it extremely fast. It is mainly used to cache frequently used data and reduce the load on the main database, which improves system performance and response time.Stores frequently accessed data so applications can retrieve it quickly without querying the main database, improving performance and response time. Used to store user sessions for fast authentication and helps manage queues, leaderboards, and analytics in applications requiring quick updates.Example: An e-commerce website can use Redis to cache product details so users can load product pages much faster.Real-World Applications Redis is widely used by large-scale applications to handle high-speed data access, real-time processing, and efficient caching.Amazon & Flipkart: Use Redis to cache product details, prices, and user sessions, ensuring fast page loads and smooth checkout during high traffic sales. Netflix: Uses Redis for caching frequently accessed content data and managing real-time user sessions to deliver a seamless streaming experience. Facebook & Instagram: Use Redis to handle real-time notifications, feeds, and user activity for fast and responsive interactions. Uber: Uses Redis for real-time location tracking, ride matching, and surge pricing calculations.WorkingRedis acts as a caching layer between the database and the client to speed up data access and reduce the load on the main database. When a client asks for data, the API Gateway forwards the request to Redis.Working of Redis Request Handling: The client request is routed through the API Gateway, which first checks Redis for the required data. Cache Hit: If the data exists in Redis, it is returned immediately without accessing the database. Cache Miss: If the data is not found in Redis, the request is forwarded to the main database. Cache Update: The data retrieved from the database is stored in Redis for future requests. Response to Client: The API Gateway sends the final response to the client using data from Redis or the database. Example: When a user visits a popular product page, Redis serves the cached product information instantly instead of querying the database every time.Before starting to learn Redis, we need to install redis on our system.
            Python

    import redis
r = redis.Redis(host='localhost', port=6379, db=0)

r.set('name', 'Alia')
print(r.get('name').decode('utf-8'))  

r.set('name', 'Riya')
print(r.get('name').decode('utf-8')) 

r.delete('name')
print(r.get('name'))  

Output Understand the above example:import redisThis line imports the redis Python library, which allows you to talk to a Redis server from your Python code.r = redis.Redis(host='localhost', port=6379, db=0)This line creates a connection to the Redis server.host='localhost': Connects to the Redis server running on your local machine. port=6379: Uses the default port on which Redis listens for connections. db=0: Connects to Redis logical database 0. Redis supports multiple logical databases numbered from 0 onward. The variable r acts as a Redis client object that can be used to perform various Redis operations.r.set('name', 'Alia')This statement stores a key-value pair in Redis.Key: nameValue: AliaAfter execution, Redis stores the data as:name -> AliaThis line stores the key name with the value Alia in Redis. print(r.get('name').decode('utf-8'))This statement retrieves and displays the value associated with the key name.r.get('name') fetches the value from Redis. Redis returns data in bytes format, such as b'Alia'. .decode('utf-8') converts the bytes into a readable string. The output displayed on the console is:Note: In this example, Redis is integrated with Python but redis can also be implemented in other programming languages like Java, JavaScript (Node.js), Go, Ruby, C# (.NET), PHP, and many more, using their respective Redis client libraries.Use Cases of RedisRedis is useful when an application needs very fast data access and frequent database queries can slow down the system. It is commonly used to store temporary or frequently accessed data in memory so that the main database does not need to be queried every time.Caching Frequently Used Data: If an application repeatedly queries a database like MySQL for the same data, the results can be stored in Redis. Instead of waiting 100–1000 ms for a database response, the application can fetch the cached result from Redis in a few milliseconds.Session Management: Redis can store user sessions for web applications, allowing quick access to login or session data.Real-time Applications: It is useful for leaderboards, queues, notifications, and chat systems that require very fast updates.Example: In a messaging application, Redis can store the last few messages of a conversation using its list data structure so that users can quickly see recent messages without repeatedly querying the main database.Factors That Make Redis FastRedis is extremely fast because it stores data in memory (RAM) instead of reading from disk storage. Accessing data from memory is much quicker, which allows Redis to process requests with very low latency.In-Memory Storage: All data is stored in RAM, so read and write operations are much faster than disk-based databases.Single-Threaded Event Loop: Redis processes commands using a single-threaded architecture, which avoids the overhead of managing multiple threads and context switching.Efficient Data Structures: Redis uses optimized data structures like lists, sets, hashes, and sorted sets for quick data operations.Lightweight Communication Protocol: It uses a simple protocol called RESP (Redis Serialization Protocol) that enables fast communication between the client and the server.Example: When an application requests cached product data from Redis, the response can be returned in microseconds, whereas querying a disk-based database may take milliseconds.Related Article: Difference Between Redis Vs MongoDB
