# Mapping from ER Model to Relational Model - GeeksforGeeks

Converting an Entity-Relationship (ER) diagram to a Relational Model is an important step in database design. The ER model represents the conceptual structure of a database, and the Relational Model is a physical representation that can be directly implemented using a Relational Database Management System (RDBMS) like Oracle or MySQL. Different CasesCase 1:  Binary Relationship with 1:1 cardinality with total participation of an entity Binary Relationship with 1:1 cardinality with total participation of an entity Note: A person has 0 or 1 passport number and Passport is always owned by 1 person. So it is 1:1 cardinality with full participation constraint from Passport.First Convert each entity and relationship to tables.  Person table corresponds to Person Entity with key as Per-Id. Similarly Passport table corresponds to Passport Entity with key as Pass-No. Has Table represents relationship between Person and Passport (Which person has which passport). So it will take attribute Per-Id from Person and Pass-No from Passport.   Table 1         Person Has PassportPer-IdOther Person AttributePer-IdPass-NoPass-NoOther PassportAttributePR1-PR1PS1PS1-PR2-PR2PS2PS2-PR3-      As we can see from Table 1, each Per-Id and Pass-No has only one entry in  Has Table. So we can merge all three tables into 1 with attributes shown in Table 2. Each Per-Id will be unique and not null. Table 2Per-IdOther Person AttributePass-NoOther PassportAttributeNote: So it will be the key. Pass-No can’t be key because for some person, it can be NULL.Case 2: Binary Relationship with 1:1 cardinality and partial participation of both entitiesBinary Relationship with 1:1 cardinality and partial participation of both entities A male marries 0 or 1 female and vice versa as well. So it is 1:1 cardinality with partial participation constraint from both. First Convert each entity and relationship to tables.  Male table corresponds to Male Entity with key as M-Id. Similarly Female table corresponds to Female Entity with key as F-Id. Marry Table represents relationship between Male and Female (Which Male marries which female). So it will take attribute M-Id from Male and F-Id from Female. Table 3Male Marry FemaleM-IdOther Male AttributeM-IdF-IdF-IdOther FemaleAttributeM1-M1F2F1-M2-M2F1F2-M3-    F3-As we can see from Table 3, some males and some females do not marry. If we merge 3 tables into 1, for some M-Id, F-Id will be NULL. So there is no attribute which is always not NULL. So we can’t merge all three tables into 1. We can convert into 2 tables. In table 4, M-Id who are married will have F-Id associated. For others, it will be NULL. Table 5 will have information of all females. Primary Keys have been underlined. Table 4   M-IdOther Male AttributeF-IdTable 5    F-IdOther FemaleAttributeNote: Binary relationship with 1:1 cardinality will have 2 table if partial participation of both entities in the relationship. If atleast 1 entity has total participation, number of tables required will be 1. Case 3: Binary Relationship with n: 1 cardinality Binary Relationship with n: 1 cardinality In this scenario, every student can enroll only in one elective course but for an elective course there can be more than one student. First Convert each entity and relationship to tables.  Student table corresponds to Student Entity with key as S-Id. Similarly Elective_Course table corresponds to Elective_Course Entity with key as E-Id. Enrolls Table represents relationship between Student and Elective_Course (Which student enrolls in which course). So it will take attribute S-Id from Student and E-Id from Elective_Course. Table 6Student Enrolls Elective_CourseS-IdOther Student AttributeS-IdE-IdE-IdOther Elective CourseAttributeS1-S1E1E1-S2-S2E2E2-S3- S3E1 E3-S4- S4E1   As we can see from Table 6, S-Id is not repeating in Enrolls Table. So it can be considered as a key of Enrolls table. Both Student and Enrolls Table’s key is same. We can merge it as a single table. Table 7 S-IdOther Student AttributeE-IdTable 8E-IdOther Elective CourseAttributeNote: The resultant tables are shown in Table 7 and Table 8. Primary Keys have been underlined. Case 4: Binary Relationship with m: n cardinalityBinary Relationship with m: n cardinalityIn this scenario, every student can enroll in more than 1 compulsory course and for a compulsory course there can be more than 1 student. First Convert each entity and relationship to tables.  Student table corresponds to Student Entity with key as S-Id. Similarly Compulsory_Courses table corresponds to Compulsory Courses Entity with key as C-Id. Enrolls Table represents relationship between Student and Compulsory_Courses (Which student enrolls in which course). So it will take attribute S-Id from Student and C-Id from Compulsory_Courses. Table 9Student Enrolls Compulsory_CoursesS-IdOther Student AttributeS-IdC-IdC-IdOther Compulsory CourseAttributeS1-S1C1C1-S2-S1C2C2-S3- S3C1 C3-S4- S4C3 C4-   S4C2      S3C3   As we can see from Table 9, S-Id and C-Id both are repeating in Enrolls Table. But its combination is unique; so it can be considered as a key of Enrolls table. Note: All tables’ keys are different, these can’t be merged.  Primary Keys of all tables have been underlined. Case 5: Binary Relationship with weak entityBinary Relationship with weak entityIn this scenario, an employee can have many dependents and one dependent can depend on one employee. A dependent does not have any existence without an employee (e.g; you as a child can be dependent of your father in his company). So it will be a weak entity and its participation will always be total. Weak Entity does not have key of its own. So its key will be combination of key of its identifying entity (E-Id of Employee in this case) and its partial key (D-Name).  Table 10Employee Has DependentsE-IdOther Employee AttributeE-IdD-NameD-NameE-IdOther DependentsAttributeE1-E1RAMRAME1-E2-E1SRINISRINIE1-E3-E2RAMRAME2-  E3ASHISHASHISHE3-First Convert each entity and relationship to tables.  Employee table corresponds to Employee Entity with key as E-Id. Similarly Dependents table corresponds to Dependent Entity with key as  D-Name and E-Id. Has Table represents relationship between Employee and Dependents (Which employee has which dependents). So it will take attribute E-Id from Employee and D-Name from Dependents.  Table 11E-IdOther Employee AttributeAs we can see from Table 10, E-Id, D-Name is key for Has as well as Dependents Table. So we can merge these two into 1. Table 12D-NameE-IdOther DependentsAttributeNote: So the resultant tables are shown in Tables 11 and 12. Primary Keys of all tables have been underlined.
